---
layout: default     
title: HW1&mdash;What is Missing in Current Search Engine Services         
category: hws       
permalink: hws/hw1.html       
published: true        
---

Innovations are often motivated by a dissatisfaction with our current living
environment and a vision about how to address this dissatisfaction and change
our world for the better. For example, the visionary article [As We May Think](http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1945/07/as-we-may-think/303881/)
written by Vannevar Bush in 1945 stimulated research in information retrieval in
early days. The Memex machine vision laid out in this article was based on an
analysis of the world then, which led to the recognition of many inadequacies
of the conventional library systems in helping a researcher to collect, select,
and digest all the accumulated knowledge in the world. The Memex machine was
then "designed" to remove these inadequacies.

Do a similar analysis of the world today in terms of information services
provided to people by a search engine like Google, identify some major
limitations, and write a short essay (with 400~600 words) to analyze the
limitations and discuss possible ways to break these limitations and thus
improve the current search engine services. While there are many ways to improve current
search engines, you are also encouraged to envision a new system or function very different
from the current search services with ideas that go beyond search to help people
access information in other ways or better support users in decision making.

A good way to think about it is to consider the needs of yourself and people
around you. Can we do a better job to improve the way we access, manage, and
utilize information? For example, we all spend some time every day to browse news and social media, can we
develop some tool to link those two sources of information and cross reference each other, in order to provide us a comprehensive understanding of the world? Trustworthiness is a serious problem in social media and search results, can we identify trustful source of information by some machine learning and information retrieval techniques? Can a system recommend activities for us based on our friends schedule and interest, so that we can quickly get to know more new friends.    

In terms of functions, in general, we can think about how to move beyond search
toward information access. Search is just one way to access information. What
about information recommendation? What about allowing a user to find information
flexibly in multiple ways (browsing + search + recommendation)? How can we
better present search results? We can also further think about how to move
beyond information access to task support or decision-making support. For
example, many users use a Web search engine to find information about products
to help optimizing their purchasing decisions. How can we best help such users
more directly to finish their tasks? Systems like Google Products and Orbitz
have been designed for this purpose. Can we do better? Many people want to
compare products, can we pull out reviews about similar products and generate a
"comparative summary" to help people compare these products? Information
integration is another major line of directions. We currently have two extremes
- either search the entire Web or search a specific website. Can we provide some
federated search portal that would allow us to search all the computer science
department websites? How do we integrate the search results and present them
in a useful way to users in such a case? For example, can we generate a
comprehensive summary of all the Ph.D. programs in Computer Science and then compare them?

If you cannot seem to come up with ideas, you can try to identify a specific
(difficult) query that doesn't seem to work well on Google. You can then try to
analyze the reason why the query doesn't work well, and discuss how you can
possibly improve the search engine based on your analysis.

This exercise is intended to lead you to start thinking about what you can do
for your course projects. Your real course project doesn't have to follow the
idea(s) that you discuss in this essay, though; as time goes and you learn
more about the topic of information retrieval, you might have other good ideas for your project or you
might want to work with others on a joint project.

## Submission

Your essay will be graded based on the novelty and practical/research value of the
idea(s) you have discussed. It is your duty to convince the instructor about your idea(s)! 

Please send a PDF version of your essay to the instructor before the deadline (no restriction of format or template to use). Your grade, in a scale of 0-100 points, will be notified by email after the deadline.

## Deadline

The deadline for this assignment is 11:59pm, Friday, September 19th. 

## Selected essays from students:

Below is a list of selected essays from our students, from where you can find inspiring new ideas for information retrieval research and how such techniques can impact our life. I believe they are good starting points for preparing your course project proposals.    
   
- "[Google, it’s Personal! How to Improve Search Engine Services]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/HWs/HW1_emc8tq.pdf)", Ellie
Clougherty    
- "[What is Missing in Current Search Engine Services]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/HWs/mr4xb_HW1.pdf)", Md Mustafizur Rahman    
- "[Answer Retrieval in Search Engines]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/HWs/HW1-ssh5d.pdf)", Sam Hewitt   
- "[What is Missing in Current Search Engine Services.]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/HWs/HW1_cek6b.pdf)", Christian Kummerle