---
layout: article     
title: HW1&mdash; Basic Concepts about Probability and Linear Algebra        
category: hws        
author: Hongning Wang
description: HW1 for basic concepts about probability      
---

This homework assignment is designed to help you recall important concepts in probability and linear algebra. This assignment has in total **100** points. The deadline and submission guidance are explicitly described [here](#time).

## 1. Joint, marginal and conditional probabilities (35pts)

<center>
<table border="1" style="width:650px;">
	<tr>
		<td align="center"></td>
		<td align="center">$Y=1$</td>
		<td align="center">$Y=2$</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td align="center">$X=1$</td>
		<td align="center">1/3</td>
		<td align="center">1/12</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td align="center">$X=2$</td>
		<td align="center">1/6</td>
		<td align="center">0</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td align="center">$X=4$</td>
		<td align="center">1/12</td>
		<td align="center">1/3</td>
	</tr>
</table>
</center> 

1.1 Compute $P(X\le 2, Y>1)$. (5pts)             
1.2 Compute marginal probability mass function for $X$ and $Y$. (5pts)                 
1.3 Compute $P(Y=2|X=1)$. (5pts)       
1.4 Are $X$ and $Y$ independent? (5pts)             
1.5 Define $Z=X-2Y$, compute $P(X=2|Z=0)$. (5pts)             
1.6 Compute $E[X|Y=1]$. (5pts)                   
1.7 Compute $Var[X|Y=2]$. (5pts)                         


## 2. Proof of probabilistic ranking principle (15pts)

In our lecture discussion, we introduce the concept of probabilistic ranking principle from risk minimization perspective. However, we have not proved that ranking by the probability of being relevant will minimize the risk yet. Please finish that proof by assuming: 1) probability of a document being relevant is independent of the other documents; 2) users will sequentially browsing the results from top to bottom. What you need to prove is that whenever a user stops browsing, the scanned results are optimal in terms of those two types of risk, i.e., presenting an irrelevant result or missing a relevant result.      

## 3. Maximum likelihood estimation (20pts) 

The probability density function of Gaussian distribution is $f(x|\mu,\sigma)=\frac{1}{\sigma\sqrt(2\pi)}e^{-\frac{(x-\mu)^2}{2\sigma^2}$. Given a set of observations from this Gaussian distribution, $X={x_1,x_2,\dots,x_n}$, estimate the mean parameter $\mu$ and variance parameter $\sigma$. 


## Submission

Your essay will be graded based on the novelty and practical/research value of the
idea(s) you have discussed. It is your duty to convince the instructor about your idea(s)! 

Please submit a PDF version of your essay to our Collab site before the deadline (no restriction of format or template to use). Your grade, in a scale of 0-100 points, will be announced in Collab after the deadline.

## <a name="time"></a> Deadline

The deadline for this assignment is 11:55pm, Monday, October 19th. 
   
