---
layout: article     
title: MP1&mdash; Getting Familiar with Text Processing     
category: mps    
permalink: mps/mp1.html    
published: true   
author: Hongning Wang 
---

This assignment is designed to help you get familiar with basic document representation and analysis techniques. You will get the basic idea of text processing, e.g., tokenization, stemming, and normalization, construct vector space representation for text documents, TF/IDF weighting, and compute similarity among different text documents. It has in total 100 points.

The deadline and submission guidance are explicitly described [here](#time).

# Data Set

The instructor has prepared a small size collection of Yelp restaurant reviews. The data set is located at 

	"/home/hw5x/TextMining/MP1/data/Yelp" 

The review files are named and organized in the following manner:

1. Each file contains all the review documents for a specific business on Yelp, and it is named by its unique ID on Yelp, e.g., *FAhx3UZtXvqNiEAd-GNruQ.json*;
2. All the files are in json format. Each json file contains a json array of reviews ('Reviews') and a json object about the information of the restaurant ('RestaurantInfo').              

	2.1 The json object for **user review** is defined as follows: 
          
		{          
			'Author':'author name (string)',
			'ReviewID':'unique review id (string)',  
			'Overall':'numerical rating of the review (float)',
			'Content':'review text content (string)',   
			'Date':'date when the review was published',   
			'Author_Location':'author's registered location'  
		} 
    
	2.2 The json object for **restaurant info** is defined as follows:

		{                
			'RestaurantID':'unique business id in Yelp (string)',    
			'Name':'name of the business (string)',      
			'Price':'Yelp defined price range (string)',    
			'RestaurantURL':'actual URL to the business page on Yelp (string)',   
			'Longitude':'longitude of the business (double)',              
			'Latitude':'latitude of the business (double)',              
			'Address':'address of the business (string)',       
			'ImgURL':'URL to the business's image on Yelp (string)'     
		} 

**WARNING**: some collected json files might not strictly follow the above json object definitions, e.g., some fields are missing or empty. As a result, properly handling the exceptions in json parsing is necessary.

# Sample implementation

A [sample Java project]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/codes/MP1.zip) has been provided along with this assignment for demonstration purpose. It includes sample code for loading JSON files, tokenization with OpenNLP and stemming with Snowball Stemmer. 

It is recommended for you to follow this sample implementation to finish this assignment. It is also allowed to use Python or any other programming language for this assignment, if you are more confident with them. However, no sample implementation will be provided (some Python package usage examples are provided below for your reference). 
                 
**NOTE**: please carefully read the comments in the sample project. All the sample implementation is for demonstration purpose; and please carefully revise it to maximize your own implementation's efficiency.

# <a name="preparation"></a>Preparation: Basic Text Processing Techniques

## Terminologies

Before describing the specifications of this assignment, several terminologies that will be repeatedly used below  are defined here:

- **Document**: it refers to each individual Yelp review document contained in the json file. Therefore, one json file might contain multiple review documents.                
- **Restaurant**: it refers to a specific restaurant entity contained in the given review data set. It is uniquely identified by the corresponding Yelp ID; and one json for one restaurant.            
- **DF/IDF/TF/TTF/Cosine similarity**: the definitions for those metrics strictly follow those on our lecture slides, unless specifically defined below.

Next, let's go over several important concepts and techniques for basic text analysis.

## Tokenization

Tokenization is the process that one breaks a stream of text into meaningful units. Simple tokenizatoin can be achieved by [regular expressions](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression). For example, the follow statement in [Java split](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/lang/String.html#split(java.lang.String)) the input string into tokens:

	"I've practiced for 30 years in pediatrics, and I've never seen anything quite like this.".split("[\\W]+")

In this statement, we define the boundary for a token to be any non-word sequence. And the corresponding output of this statement is,

	*I*, *ve*, *practiced*, *for*, *30*, *years*, *in*, *pediatrics*, *and*, *I*, *ve*, *never*, *seen*, *anything*, *quite*, *like*, *this*
where \*\* indicate the boundary of a token.

A more advanced solution is the statistic machine learning based approaches. And in this assignment, we will show you how to use the tokenizer in [OpenNLP](http://opennlp.apache.org/documentation/1.5.3/manual/opennlp.html#tools.tokenizer) (in Java) and [NLTK](http://nltk.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/doc/api/nltk.tokenize-module.html) (in Python) to perform tokenization. The NLTK package has been installed on all three CS lab servers.

### 1. Tokenizer in OpenNLP

The detailed documentation for this tokenizer can be found [here](http://opennlp.apache.org/documentation/1.5.3/manual/opennlp.html#tools.tokenizer). You can download the library [here](http://www.dsgnwrld.com/am//opennlp/opennlp-1.5.3/apache-opennlp-1.5.3-src.zip) and the trained model file [here](http://opennlp.sourceforge.net/models-1.5/) (please choose the English tokenizer). 

Once you have properly load the model from file, tokenization can be simply performed by, 

	String tokens[] = tokenizer.tokenize("An input sample sentence.");
     
### 2. Tokenizer in NLTK 
NLTK provides several implementations of [tokenization modules](http://nltk.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/doc/api/nltk.tokenize-module.html), and many of them are actually regular expression based.

The usage of them is the same and very simple,

	>>> import nltk
	>>> tokenizer = nltk.tokenize.treebank.TreebankWordTokenizer()
	>>> tokenizer.tokenize("I've practiced for 30 years in pediatrics, and I've never seen anything quite like this.")
	['I', "'ve", 'practiced', 'for', '30', 'years', 'in', 'pediatrics', ',', 'and', 'I', "'ve", 'never', 'seen', 'anything', 'quite', 'like', 'this', '.']

## Stemming

Stemming refers to the process of reducing inflected (or sometimes derived) words to their stem, base or root form. For example, "ladies" would be mapped to "ladi" as a result of stemming (although "lady" would be a more desirable result).

### 1. Stemmers in Java
Unfortunately, OpenNLP does not support stemming function currently. There are several existing implementations of stemmer in Java available, including [Snowball Stemmer](http://snowball.tartarus.org/download.php) and [Porter Stemmer](http://tartarus.org/~martin/PorterStemmer/java.txt). The Snowball Stemmer package contains both of these two popularly used stemmers.

The usage of stemmers Snowball package is very simple,

	SnowballStemmer stemmer = new englishStemmer(); // get an instance of SnowballStemmer for English
	stemmer.setCurrent(token); // set the input
	stemmer.stem(); //perform stemming
	String stem = stemmer.getCurrent(); // get the output

### 2. Stemmers in NLTK 
NLTK provides several implementations of [stemming modules](http://nltk.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/doc/api/nltk.stem-module.html), which includes the Porter Stemmer and Snowball Stemmer.

The usage of either stemmer in NLTK is very simple. For example, to use Snowball Stemmer,

	>>> from nltk.stem.snowball import EnglishStemmer # load the stemmer module from NLTK
	>>> stemmer = EnglishStemmer() # get an instance of SnowballStemmer for English
	>>> stemmer.stem('ladies') # call stemmer to stem the input
	u'ladi'

## Stopword removal

In basic text analysis, stopwords are the words that are filtered out before or after processing of natural language text data, based on the assumption that such words do not carry specific semantic meanings. However, there is not one definite list of stopwords that are applicable in all scenarios, and the definition of stopwords are always domain specific. 

Here is a popularly used list of stopwords: [Smart system's stopword list](http://jmlr.org/papers/volume5/lewis04a/a11-smart-stop-list/english.stop). And we will use it as our initial stopword list for this assignment.  

## N-gram

An N-gram is a contiguous sequence of n items from a given sequence of text or speech. For example the bigram (2-gram) representation of the sentence "Text mining is helpful for everyone." would be ["text-mining", "mining-is", "is-helpful", "helpful-for", "for-everyone"].

To generate the N-grams, you simply scan through the list of split tokens and concatenate the consecutive tokens into N-grams. 

## Pre-processing
There are several general steps of pre-processing you need to take to finish this assignment.

- Tokenization: tokenize the review content of each document into tokens.
- Normalization: normalize the tokens from step 1, by removing individual punctuation marks (here is a list of [English punctuation marks](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Punctuation_of_English)), converting tokens into lower cases, and recognizing digit numbers, e.g., integers and floats, and map them to a special symbol "NUM". 
- Stemming: stem the tokens back to their root form. 

# <a name="vsm"></a>Vector Space Model (100pts)      

Based on the above pre-processing steps, we are ready to get some statistics about this corpus and represent the documents in vector space.

### 1 Understand Zipf's Law (20pts)

First, let's validate the Zipf's law with the provided Yelp review data set. This can be achieved by the following steps:

1. Process the text document according to the discussed steps above.
2. For each token, go over all the review documents containing it  (in both **train** and **test** folder), and accumulate its frequency in those documents, i.e., total term frequency (TTF).
3. Order the tokens by their TTF in a descending order.
4. Create a dot plot by treating each word's rank as x-axis and its TTF as y-axis. Please use log-log scale for this plot.

*Hint: basically, you can maintain a look-up table in memory while you are scanning through the documents, so that you only need to go through the corpus once to get the counts for all the tokens.*

From the resulting plot, can we find a strong linear relationship between the x and y axes in the log-log scale? If so, what is the slope of this linear relationship? To answer these questions, you can dump the data into excel and use the plot function there. (You can also use some scientific computing packages for curve fitting for this purpose.)          

Then change the counting statistics in the previous experiment from *total term frequency (TTF)* to *document frequency (DF)*, and perform the experiment again. According to new curve and corresponding slope and intercept of the linear interpretation, can you conclude which counting statistics, i.e., *TTF* v.s., *DF*, fits Zipf's law better on this data set? Can you give any explanation about why it fits the law better?

**What to submit**: 

1. Paste your implementation of text normalization module.
2. Two curves in log-log space generated above, with the corresponding slopes and intercepts of the linear interpretation results;
3. Your answers and thoughts to the above questions.

### 2 Construct a Controlled Vocabulary (10pts)

According to the procedure illustrated in our lecture slide, generate all the bigrams based on the resulting tokens from the pre-processing step (**only in the train folder**), and mix those bigrams with the unigrams as our initial controlled vocabulary.

Collect the DF statistics for all the N-grams (i.e., unigram and bigram) in this initial controlled vocabulary (**only in the train folder**), and find out the top 100 N-grams by DF. Compare this list with our initial stopword list and can you find some restaurant review specific stopwords? Merge those top 100 N-grams into the initial stopword list as our final stopword list.

In the meanwhile, filter out the N-grams with DF smaller than 50. All the rest N-grams will be used as our controlled vocabulary.

**What to submit**:

1. List of new stopwords you found specific to restaurant reviews.
2. The size of the resulting controlled vocabulary (i.e., total N-grams in it).
3. Top 50 and bottom 50 N-grams according to DF in the resulting controlled vocabulary, and their corresponding IDFs (**should be estimated only based on the train folder**).


### 3 Compute similarity between documents (20pts)

With the above automatically constructed controlled vocabulary, each review document can be represented as a N-gram vector. Specifically, each dimension in this vector space is defined by the mix of unigrams and bigrams defined in the controlled vocabulary; while the weight for each unigram/bigram in a review document is defined by TF-IDF. Specifically, we will use "**Sub-linear TF scaling**" to compute the normalized TF of each unigram/bigram in a review document. Note the IDF statistics should be **only computed based on the train folder**.

Using this document representation to encode all the review documents in the test folder. 

Under the folder of "/home/hw5x/TextMining/MP1/data/Yelp", there is a special json file named "query.json", which is manually crafted by the instructor. It contains five carefully selected restaurant reviews from and outside the provided corpus. Construct the vector space representations for these five reviews (as what you have done for those review documents in the test folder) and find out the most similar reviews to them from the test folder, where the similarity metric is defined as cosine similarity. 

**What to submit**:

1. Paste your implementation of cosine similarity computation.
2. For each document in the "query.json" file, list the top 3 most similar review documents (including Author, Content and Date) from the test folder and the corresponding cosine similarity.
3. Without reading the actual content in the "query.json" file, by simply judging from the content of the retrieved most similar review documents, can you tell which type of restaurants are specified in the query.json file (e.g., Indian food or Korean food)?
 
# <a name="time"></a>Deadlines & How to submit

We have two deadlines: Part1 is due on **Feb. 12th 11:55pm**; and Part2 is due on **Feb. 19th 11:55pm**. Therefore, you have in total 14 days to finish this MP. The late policy for all our homework has been carefully discussed in the course syllabus.

Two separated collab assignment pages have been created for this MP. Please submit your written report strictly following the requirement specified above. The report **must be in PDF** format.   


# <a name="solution"></a>Sample solution

The following sample solution is provided by Mohammad Al Boni.

* Part 1: Vector Space Model, [Report]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/codes/MP1-Part1-Mohammad.pdf)
* Part 2: Statistical Language Models, [Report]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/codes/MP1-Part2-Mohammad.pdf)
* [Java Implementation]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/codes/MP1-solution-Mohammad.zip), [Presentation slides]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/codes/MP1-Mohammad.pptx)

The following derivation of $S$ in absolute discount is provided by Lin Gong.

* Proof of $S$ equals to the word types (i.e., unique words) following $w\_{i-1}$, [Proof]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/codes/MP1-Part2-Lin-AbsoluteDiscount.pdf)
  